feat!: Implement Function Groups (#684)
NVIDIA/NeMo-Agent-Toolkit: docs/source/extend/function-groups.md

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2025, NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Writing Custom Function Groups

It is strongly recommended to first read the [Function Groups](../workflows/function-groups.md) guide before reading this guide.

> Function groups bundle related functions that share configuration and runtime context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Function groups are bundle related functions that share configuration and runtime context.
```

Use them to centralize resource management (for example, database connections) and to group functions by namespace.

> It is also possible to selectively include and exclude functions, from the function group. Selective inclusion enables namespace isolation of functions within the group and makes them addressable as ordinary functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also selectively include and exclude functions from the function group. Selective inclusion enables namespace isolation of functions within the group and makes them addressable as ordinary functions.
```

## Define the Configuration

Create a configuration class that inherits from {py:class}`~nat.data_models.function.FunctionGroupBaseConfig`. Use Pydantic fields for validation and documentation.

The optional `include` list controls which functions in the group become globally addressable and accessible to the workflow builder. If any function from the group is not listed in `include`, it will not be added to the global registry.
The optional `exclude` list controls which functions in the group should not be addressable and accessible to the workflow builder and also not be wrapped as tools.
If both `include` and `exclude` are empty, no functions are globally added, but you can still access the group and its functions programmatically.

:::{note}
`include` and `exclude` are mutually exclusive. If both are provided, a `ValueError` will be raised.
:::

```python
from pydantic import Field
from nat.data_models.function import FunctionGroupBaseConfig

class MyGroupConfig(FunctionGroupBaseConfig, name="my_group"):
    pass
```

## Register the Function Group

> Register using {py:func}`nat.cli.register_workflow.register_function_group`. The registered coroutine should yield a {py:class}`~nat.builder.function.FunctionGroup` instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you register using {py:func}`nat.cli.register_workflow.register_function_group`, The registered coroutine should yield a {py:class}`~nat.builder.function.FunctionGroup` instance.
```

    included_functions = my_group.get_included_functions()

    # Or only the excluded functions
    excluded_functions = my_group.get_excluded_functions()
```

## Input Schemas

When you add a function with {py:meth}`~nat.builder.function.FunctionGroup.add_function`, the toolkit infers input/output schemas from the callable's type hints. You can override the input schema and attach converters if needed:

```python
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
from nat.builder.function_info import FunctionInfo

class GreetingInput(BaseModel):
    name: str = Field(description="Name to greet", min_length=1)

async def greet_fn(name: str) -> str:
    return f"Hello, {name}!"

group.add_function(name="greet",
                   fn=greet_fn,
                   input_schema=GreetingInput,
                   description="Return a friendly greeting")
```

## Best Practices

- Keep group instance names short and descriptive; they become part of function names.
- Share expensive resources (for example, clients, caches) through the group context instead of recreating them per function.
- Validate inputs with Pydantic schemas for robust error handling.

## Next Steps

> - Review [Writing Custom Functions](./functions.md) for details that also apply to functions inside groups (type safety, streaming vs. single outputs, converters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Review [Writing Custom Functions](./functions.md) for details that also apply to functions inside groups, such as type safety, streaming vs. single outputs, and converters.
```
